ProCaelio35-40
Cicero
Prose
34

Sed quid ego, iudices, ita gravem personam induxi, ut verear, ne se idem Appius repente convertat et Caelium incipiat accusare illa sua gravitate censoria?
But why have I, jurors, brought on stage a serious persona in this way, so that I fear that the same Appius suddenly turns and begins to accuse Caelius with that stern seriousness of his?

Sed videro hoc posterius, atque ita, iudices, ut vel severissimis disceptatoribus M. Caeli vitam me probaturum esse confidam.
But I will see to this later, and in such a way, jurors, that I will be confident I will approve the life of Marcus Caelius even to very stern judges.

Tu vero, mulier, (iam enim ipse tecum nulla persona introducta loquor) si ea, quae facis, quae dicis, quae insimulas, quae moliris, quae arguis, probare cogitas, rationem tantae familiaritatis, tantae consuetudinis, tantae coniunctionis reddas atque exponas necesse est.
Indeed you, woman, (for now I myself am speaking with you, with no persona brought on stage), if you are intending to prove those things that you’re doing, that you’re saying, that you’re alleging, that you’re endeavoring (to prove), that you’re declaring, it is necessary that you give back and explain an account of such great intimacy, such great “experience,” of such great connection.

Accusatores quidem libidines, amores, adulteria, Baias, actas, convivia, comissationes, cantus, symphonias, navigia iactant, idemque significant nihil se te invita dicere. 
Indeed the prosecutors toss around desires, loves, adultery, Baiae, resorts, banquets, drinking-parties, songs, symphonies, ships, and the same indicate that they are saying nothing with you unwilling. 

Quae tu quoniam mente nescio qua effrenata atque praecipiti in forum deferri iudiciumque voluisti, aut diluas oportet ac falsa esse doceas aut nihil neque crimini tuo neque testimonio credendum esse fateare.
Because you wanted these things and with I don’t know what unbridled and swift mind to be brought down into the forum and court, it’s proper either that you wash away and  point out that these things are false or confess that neither your charge nor your testimony are to be believed.

Sin autem urbanius me agere mavis, sic agam tecum; removebo illum senem durum ac paene agrestem; ex his igitur tuis sumam aliquem ac potissimum minimum fratrem, qui est in isto genere urbanissimus; qui te amat plurimum, qui propter nescio quam, credo, timiditatem et nocturnos quosdam inanes metus tecum semper pusio cum maiore sorore cubitavit. Eum putato tecum loqui: "Quid tumultuaris, soror? quid insanis?
But if on the other hand you prefer me to act more sophisticatedly, I will act in this way with you; I will remove that harsh and almost hickish old man; I shall therefore assume someone from these (current people) of yours and indeed your most powerful youngest brother, who is most impudent in that respect; who loves you very much, who on account of I don’t know what fearfulness, I believe, and certain nighttime empty fears always as a youth lay down with you, with his older sister. Suppose he’s speaking with you: “Why are you raising a ruckus, sister? Why are you raving?

Quid clamorem exorsa verbis parvam rem magnam facis?
Why, having started an uproar, are you making a small thing big with your words?

Vicinum adulescentulum aspexisti; candor huius te et proceritas, vultus oculique pepulerunt; saepius videre voluisti; fuisti non numquam in isdem hortis; vis nobilis mulier illum filium familias patre parco ac tenaci habere tuis copiis devinctum; non potes; calcitrat, respuit, non putat tua dona esse tanti; confer te alio.
You caught sight of a neighboring dear young man; the paleness of this youth and his height, his face and his eyes aroused you; you wanted to see him more often; you were not never in the same gardens; you, noble woman, want to have that son with a stingy and tight-fisted father connected to your wealth; you aren’t able; he balks, he rejects, he doesn’t think your gifts are so great; join yourself to another man.

Habes hortos ad Tiberim ac diligenter eo loco paratos, quo omnis iuventus natandi causa venit; hinc licet condiciones cotidie legas; cur huic, qui te spernit, molesta es?"
You have gardens near the Tiber and even carefully prepared in that place, to where all the youth come for swimming; from here it’s allowed that you collect daily matches; why are you troublesome to this man, who rejects you?”

Redeo nunc ad te, Caeli, vicissim ac mihi auctoritatem patriam severitatemque suscipio.
I return now to you, Caelius, again and I undertake for myself a father’s authority and severity.

Sed dubito, quem patrem potissimum sumam, Caecilianumne aliquem vehementem atque durum:
But I am uncertain which most powerful father I shall assume, some violent and harsh Caecilian (character):

Nunc enim demum mi animus ardet, nunc meum cor 
For now at last my soul blazes, now my heart

cumulatur ira
is heaped with anger

aut illum:
or that (character):

O infelix, o sceleste
Oh unlucky, oh wicked man

Ferrei sunt isti patres:
Those fathers of yours are hard-hearted:

Egon quid dicam, quid velim? quae tu omnia
What should I say, what should I wish? With your foul deeds you make

Tuis foedis factis facis ut nequiquam velim, 
Everything which I wish fruitless,

vix ferendi. Diceret talis pater: "Cur te in istam vicinitatem meretriciam contulisti? cur illecebris cognitis non refugisti? 
(Such fathers) are scarcely to be endured. Such a father might have said: “Why have you joined yourself into that vicinity of prostitutes? Why, with her enticements known, didn’t you flee?

Cur alienam ullam mulierem nosti? Dide ac disice; Per me tibi licet. Si egebis, tibi dolebit, non mihi. Mihi sat est qui aetatis quod relicuom est oblectem meae."
Why did you know any woman not your own? Spread abroad and scatter; As far as I’m concerned you’re allowed. If you will lack, it will be a source of pain for you, not me. It’s enough for me so that I might take pleasure in what remains of my life.

Huic tristi ac derecto seni responderet Caelius se nulla cupiditate inductum de via decessisse. Quid signi? 
To this sad and straightforward old man Caelius would reply that he, having been seduced by no desire, went away from the street. What indication is there?

Nulli sumptus, nulla iactura, nulla versura.
There’s no spending, no squandering, no refinancing of debts.

At fuit fama. Quotus quisque istam effugere potest in tam maledica civitate?
But there was a rumor. How few are able to escape that (gossip) in so scurrilous a community?

Vicinum eius mulieris miraris male audisse, cuius frater germanus sermones iniquorum effugere non potuit? Leni vero et clementi patre, cuius modi ille est:
Are you amazed that the neighbor of that woman, whose own brother wasn’t able to escape the conversations of the hostile, has gained a bad reputation? With his father being lenient indeed and merciful, that is of this kind:

Fores ecfregit, restituentur; discidit Vestem, resarcietur,
He has broken down the doors, they will be rebuilt; he’s cut his clothing to pieces, it will be patched,

Caeli causa est expeditissima. Quid enim esset, in quo se non facile defenderet? Nihil iam in istam mulierem dico; 
Caelius’ case is very clear of difficulty. For what would it be, concerning which he would not easily defend himself? I’m now saying nothing against that woman;

sed, si esset aliqua dissimilis istius, quae se omnibus pervolgaret, quae haberet palam decretum semper aliquem, cuius in hortos, domum, Baias iure suo libidines omnium commearent, quae etiam aleret adulescentes et parsimoniam patrum suis sumptibus sustentaret; si vidua libere, proterva petulanter, dives effuse, libidinosa meretricio more viveret, adulterum ego putarem, si quis hanc paulo liberius salutasset?
But, if there were some woman not like that one, who was prostituting herself to everyone, who always had some decided-upon man publicly, into whose gardens, home, to Baiae all the lustful ones kept traveling voluntarily, who even supports young men and compensates for the frugality of their fathers at her own expense; if a widow lived freely, an impudent woman wantonly, a rich woman lavishly, a desirous woman in a prostitute’s custom, should I think him an adulterer, if someone had greeted this woman a little too freely?

Dicet aliquis: "Haec est igitur tua disciplina? sic tu instituis adulescentes?
Someone will say: Is this your teaching then? You teach young men in this way?

ob hanc causam tibi hunc puerum parens commendavit et tradidit, ut in amore atque in voluptatibus adulescentiam suam collocaret, et ut hanc tu vitam atque haec studia defenderes?"
For this reason his parent entrusted and handed over this boy to you, so that he spent his adolescence in love and pleasures, and so that you defend this life and these endeavors?”

Ego, si quis, iudices, hoc robore animi atque hac indole virtutis atque continentiae fuit, ut respueret omnes voluptates omnemque vitae suae cursum in labore corporis atque in animi contentione conficeret, quem non quies, non remissio, non aequalium studia, non ludi, non convivia delectarent, nihil in vita expetendum putaret, nisi quod esset cum laude et cum dignitate coniunctum, hunc mea sententia divinis quibusdam bonis instructum atque ornatum puto.
If there was someone with this strength of spirit and this quality of virtue and self control, jurors, that he would reject all desires and exhaust every path of his life in the effort of the body and in the struggle of the spirit, whom rest, relaxation, the endeavors of his peers, love affairs, dinner parties did not delight, who would think nothing in life was to be strived for except that which was joined with honor and with dignity, this man, in my opinion, has been equipped and prepared with certain godly goods.

Ex hoc genere illos fuisse arbitror Camillos, Fabricios, Curios omnesque eos, qui haec ex minimis tanta fecerunt.
I think those of this type were Camilluses, Fabriciuses, Curiuses, and all those who made these things so great from so little.

Verum haec genera virtutum non solum in moribus nostris, sed vix iam in libris reperiuntur.
But these types of virtues not only are barely found in our customs, but now barely found in our books.

Chartae quoque, quae illam pristinam severitatem continebant, obsoleverunt;
Papers, too, that used to contain that former severity, have gone out of style;

neque solum apud nos, qui hanc sectam rationemque vitae re magis quam verbis secuti sumus, sed etiam apud Graecos, doctissimos homines, quibus, cum facere non possent, loqui tamen et scribere honeste et magnifice licebat, alia quaedam mutatis Graeciae temporibus praecepta exstiterunt.
Not only among us, who have pursued this way and fashion of life in deeds more than in words, but even among the Greeks, very learned people, for whom it was permitted, although they were not able to carry on virtuously and nobly, nevertheless to speak and to write virtuously and nobly, certain other precepts have arisen, with the Greeks’ times having changed.